# Project 15.45 Vacancy mediated dynamics in binary alloys
When a binary alloy is rapidly quenched from a high temperature to a low temperature unstable state, a pattern of domain formation called spinodal decomposition takes place as the two metals in the alloy separate. This process is of much interest experimentally. Lifshitz and Slyozov have predicted that at long times, the linear domain size increases with time as $R \sim t^{1/3}$. This result is independent of the dimension for $d \ge 2$, and has been verified experimentally and in computer simulations. The behavior is modified for binary fluids due to hydrodynamic effects.

Most of the computer simulations of this growth process have been based on the Ising model with spin exchange dynamics. In this model there is an A or B atom (spin up or spin down) at each site, where A and B represent different metals. The energy of interaction between atoms on two neighboring sites is $-J$ if the two atoms are the same type and $+J$ if they are different. Monte Carlo moves are made by exchanging unlike atoms. (The number of A and B atoms must be conserved.) A typical simulation begins with an equilibrated system at high temperatures. Then the temperature is changed instantaneously to a low temperature below the critical temperature $T_c$. If there are equal numbers of A and B atoms on the lattice, then spinodal decomposition occurs. If you watch a visualization of the evolution of the system, you will see wavy-like domains of each type of atom thickening with time.

The growth of the domains is very slow if we use spin exchange dynamics. We will see that if simulations are performed with vacancy mediated dynamics, the scaling behavior begins at much earlier times. Because of the large energy barriers that prevent real metallic atoms from exchanging position, it is likely that spinodal decomposition in real alloys also occurs with vacancy mediated dynamics. We can do a realistic simulation by including just one vacancy because the number of vacancies in a real alloy is also very small. In this case the only possible Monte Carlo move on a square lattice is to exchange the vacancy with one of its four neighboring atoms. To implement this algorithm, you will need an array to keep track of which type of atom is at each lattice site and variables to keep track of the location of the single vacancy. The simulation will run very fast because there is little bookkeeping and all the possible trial moves are potentially good ones. In contrast, in standard spin exchange dynamics, it is necessary to either waste computer time checking for unlike nearest neighbor atoms or keep track of where they are.

The major quantity of interest is the growth of the domain size $R$. One way to determine $R$ is to measure the pair correlation function $C(r) = \langle s_i s_j \rangle$, where $r = |\mathbf{r}_i - \mathbf{r}_j|$, and $s_i = 1$ for an A atom and $s_i = -1$ for a B atom. The first zero in $C(r)$ is a measure of the domain size. An alternative measure of the domain size is the quantity $R = 2/(\langle E \rangle/N + 2)$, where $\langle E \rangle/N$ is the average energy pe76r site and $N$ is the number of sites (see Project 15.39). The quantity $R$ is a rough measure of the length of the perimeter of a domain and is proportional to the domain size.

## Task:
- (a) Write a program to simulate vacancy mediated dynamics. The initial state consists of the random placement of A and B atoms (half of the sites have A and half B atoms); one vacancy replaces one of the atoms. Explain why this configuration corresponds to infinite temperature. Choose a square lattice with $L \ge 50$.
- (b) Instantaneously quench the system by running the Metropolis algorithm at a temperature of $T = T_c / 2 \approx 1.13$. You should first look at the lattice after every attempted move of the vacancy to see the effect of vacancy dynamics. After you are satisfied that your program is working correctly and that you understand the algorithm, speed up the simulation by only collecting data and showing the lattice at times equal to $t = 2^n$ where $n = 1, 2, 3 \dots$. Measure the domain size using either the energy or $C(r)$ as a function of time averaged over many different initial configuration quenches.
- (c) At what time does the $\log R$ versus $\log t$ plot become linear? Do both measures of the domain size give the same results? Does the behavior change for different quench temperatures? Try $0.2 T_c$ and $0.7 T_c$. A log-log plot of the domain size versus time should give the exponent $1/3$.
- (d) Repeat the measurements in three dimensions. Do you obtain the same exponent?